>> Woodruff: GOOD NEWS ON THE
JOBS FRONT TODAY AS THE
7.5% AND 165,000 NEW JOBS WERE
CREATED.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT, WE
ANALYZE THE BETTER-THAN-EXPECTED
NUMBERS AND WHAT THEY SAY ABOUT
THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY.
>> Woodruff: THE C.D.C. REPORTS
MORE PEOPLE IN THE U.S. DIE FROM
SUICIDE THAN CAR ACCIDENTS.
RAY SUAREZ LOOKS AT THIS
WORRISOME RISE IN RATES,
PARTICULARLY AMONG BABY BOOMERS.
>> Brown: PAUL SOLMAN REPORTS ON
THE PLIGHT OF OLDER WORKERS
STRUGGLING TO FIND EMPLOYMENT
EVEN AS THE JOB NUMBERS IMPROVE.
>> I HAVE 30 YEARS OF EXPERIENCE
AND YOU'LL SEE SOMETHING THAT
SAYS "WE WANT YOU TO HAVE X
AMOUNT OF SKILLS BUT WE ONLY
WANT YOU TO HAVE NO MORE THAN
TWO YEARS OF EXPERIENCE."
>> Woodruff: THE ANALYSIS OF
MARK SHIELDS AND MICHAEL GERSON,
SIING TTIN FOR DAVID BROOKS.
>> Brown: AND WE CLOSE WITH A
BOOK CONVERSATION WITH AUTHOR
MICHAEL POLLAN ABOUT THE LOSS OF
GOOD OLD-FASHIONED HOME COOKIN'.
>> PEOPLE HAVE VERY STRONG
FEELINGS ABOUT COOKING.
WE ALL HAVE MEMORIES OF BEING IN
THE KITCHEN WHEN OUR MOM WAS
PREPARING A MEAL OR OUR
GRANDMOTHER SO I DON'T THINK
WE'RE QUITE READY TO LET IT GO.
I THI THNKAT'S ONE OF THE
REASONS WE'RE OBSESSING ABOUT
IT.
THE MYSTERY IS WHY DON'T WE DO
>> Woodruff: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
IT.
TONIGHT'S NEWSHOUR.
>> Brown: SOLID JOB GROWTH IN
APRIL AND POSITIVE REVISIONS TO
PREVIOUS MONTHS.
TODAY'S LABOR DEPARTMENT FIGURES
EASED WORRIES ABOUT THE U.S.
ECONOMY.
IN ALL, THE ECONOMY ADDED
165,000 JOBS LAST MONTH
PRIMARILY IN THE PRIVATE
SECTOR-- RETAIL, RESTAURANT AND
HEALTHCARE INDUSTRIES.
T STRHEONGER-THAN-EXPECTED
HIRING HELPED REDUCE THE
NATION'S UNEMPLOYMENT RATE A
MODEST 0.10% TO 7.5%, THE LOWEST
LEVEL SINCE DECEMBER, 2008.
A FURTHER KEY ELEMENT OF TODAY'S
GOOD NEWS: DRAMATIC REVISIONS
UPWARD IN THE NUMBER OF NEW JOBS
CREATED IN FEBRUARY AND MARCH BY
A TOTAL OF 114,000.
WITH THE REVISIONS, FEBRUARY
PAYROLLS INCREASED TO 332,000
JOBS WHILE MARCH GAINS STOOD AT
138,000.
WHITE HOUSE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC
ADVISERS CHAIR ALAN KRUEGER SAID
THE HIRING NUMBERS REFLECT AN
IMPROVING JOB MARKET IN SPITE OF
FEDERAL SPENDING CUTS FROM THE
SEQUESTER, WHICH HE TK THOOE
OPPORTUNITY TO CRITICIZE.
>> TODAY'S REPORT AND OTHER DATA
COMING IN SHOWS THE RESILIENCE
OF THE U.S. ECONOMY.
THE ECONOMY IS HEALING FROM THE
SCARS OF THE GREAT RECESSION,
BUT THERE'S A WAYS TO GO.
WE'RE NOT BACK TO FULL HEALTH.
AND WE COULD PUT MORE PEOPLE
BACK TO WORK MORE QUICKLY IF WE
HAD MORE SENSIBLE FISCAL POLICY
COMING O OFUT WASHINGTON.
>> Brown: FOR ITS PART, WALL
STREET CELEBRATED TODAY'S NEWS
WITH THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL
AVERAGE CROSSING-- AT LEAST FOR
AWHILE-- THE 15,000 MARK FOR THE
FIRST TIME EVER.
BY DAY'S END, THE DOW HAD GAINED
142 POINTS TO CLOSE JUST UNDER
14,974, AN ALL-TIME HIGH.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 38 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3,378.
FOR THE WEEK, THE DOW GAINED
NEARLY 2%; THE NASDAQ ROSE 3%.
FOR A CLOSER LOOK AT TODAY'S
NUMBERS, WE'RE JOINED ONCE AGAIN
BY LISA LYNCH, DEAN OF THE
HELLER SCHOOL FOR SOCIAL POLICY
AND MANAGEMENT AT BRANDEIS
UNIVERSITY.
SHE'S A FORMER CHIEF ECONOMIST
AT THE LABOR DEPARTMENT.
WELCOME BACK.
SO, A GENERAL REACTION FIRST TO
TODAY'S NUMBERS?
WHAT DO YOU SEE?
>> WELL, IT WAS A GOOD REPORT,
CERTAINLY BETTER THAN WHAT MANY
HAD EXPECTED AND A MARKED
IMPROVEMENT FROM THE REPORT WE
SAW LAST MONTH.
WE, AS YOU SUMMARIZED IN THE
REPORT LEADING UP TO THIS, WE
SAW THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
FALLING, BUT FOR ALL GOOD
REASONS BECAUSE WE ADDED MORE
JOBS IN THE ECONOMY AS OPPOSED
TO PEOPLE DROPPING OUT OF THE
LABOR MARKET.
WE SAW THE PERCENTAGE OF PEOPLE
WHO ARE OUT OF WORK FOR SIX
MONTHS OR MORE DROPPING DOWN TO
37.4%.
IT WAS OVER 40% A YEAR AGO.
IT'S STILL HIGH BUT THAT WAS AN
IMPROVEMENT.
WE SAW WAGES UP 1.9%, KEEPING
PACE WITH INFLATION.
THAT'S GOOD NEWS.
AND WITH THOSE MONTHLY REVISIONS
TO THE PRIOR TWO MONTHS, WE'RE
NOW AVERAGING ON A THREE-MONTH
MOVING AVERAGE BASIS OVER
200,000 NET NEW JOBS IN THE
ECONOMY.
SO THAT'S TAKEN CARE OF, PEOPLE
COMING INTO THE LABOR MARKET.
>> Brown: I JUST WANT TO ASK YOU
ABOUT THE REVISIONS BECAUSE
THEY'RE VERY LARGE REVISIONS AND
I THINK IT'S HARD FOR PEOPLE TO
UNDERSTAND.
HOW AND WHY DOES THAT HAPPEN?
>> SO, THE BUREAU OF LABOR
STATISTICS GOES OUT AND CONTACTS
A SAMPLE OF EMPLOYERS AROUND THE
COUNTRY AND ASKS THEM WHAT'S
HAPPENING TO THEIR EMPLOYMENT
NUMBERS AND THEN THEY ALSO
REALIZE THAT WHEN THE ECONOMY IS
IMPROVING YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE
NEW FIRMS BEING CREATED THAT
THEY WON'T HAVE IN THEIR DATA
SET.
SO THEY MODEL OR THEY IMPUTE A
VALUE OF NEW JOBS FOR THOSE NEW
EMPLOYERS.
AND THEN WHAT HAPPENS IS THAT
EMPLOYERS GET BACK TO THEM--
SOME WITH A DELAY-- AND THEY
MAKE REVISIONS TO THE NUMBERS
FOR THE PRIOR MONTH THEY'LL --
THEY RELEASE A PRELIMINARY
NUMBER AND THEY DEAL TWO
REVISIONS OF THAT NUMBER IN THE
NEXT FEW MONTHS AND THEN AT THE
END OF THE YEAR THEY'LL GO BACK
AND THEY'LL HAVE DATA FOR ALL
EMPLOYMENT, NOT JUST A SAMPLE,
AND THEY'LL MAKE A FINAL ROUND
OF REVISIONS.
>> Brown: DOES ALL THAT RAISE
THE QUESTION OF HOW MUCH WE
SHOULD PAY ATTENTION OR TRUST
ANY ONE PARTICULAR MONTHLY
NUMBER?
>> WELL, THAT'S WHY EVERY
ECONOMIST YOU'VE EVER TALKED TO
HAS ALWAYS SAID IT'S IMPORTANT
TO LOOK AT THREE MONTHS MOVING
AVERAGES AND NEVER PUT ANY --
TOO MUCH WEIGHT ON ANY ONE
EMPLOYMENT REPORT.
>> Brown: OKAY, THAT'S GOOD
ADVICE.
WE'LL ALWAYS TAKE THAT.
POTENTIAL DOWN SIDE IN THESE
NUMBERS.
A LOT OF JOBS WERE OF THE LOW OR
MODERATE PAYING AND PART-TIME
WORK AS WELL.
>> SO WE SAW AN INCREASE OF OVER
A QUARTER OF A MILLION PEOPLE
THAT WERE WORKING IN PART-TIME
EMPLOYMENT WHO WANTED FULL-TIME
EMPLOYMENT.
WE ALSO SAW THE LENGTH OF THE
WORK WEEK DECREASING AND, YOU
KNOW, WE SAW THAT A LOT OF THE
JOBS THAT WERE ADDED WERE IN
SECTORS LIKE TEMPORARY
EMPLOYMENT, THE RETAIL SECTOR,
RESTAURANTS AND BARS THAT ARE
TYPICALLY LOWER PAYING AND LESS
LIKELY TO HAVE BENEFITS
ASSOCIATED WITH THEM.
>> Pelley: CAN YOU SEE ANY
DISCERNIBLE EVIDENCE OF IMPACT
FROM THE SEQUESTER AT THIS
POINT?
WHAT CAN BE SAID?
>> TO A LOT OF PEOPLE WE'RE
LOOKING FOR THE FINGERPRINTS OF
THE SEQUESTER IN TODAY'S REPORT
AND I THINK IT'S HARD TO SORT OF
SAY WITH ANY KIND OF CERTAINTY
THAT YOU SEE THE IMPACT OF THAT.
THE FACT THAT MORE PEOPLE WERE
IN PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT BUT WHO
WANTED FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT,
THAT MIGHT REFLECT SOMETHING OF
THE FURLOUGHS, BUT MANY OF THE
FURLOUGHS THAT THE GOVERNMENT
AGENCIES ARE PUTTING IN PLACE,
WHAT REALLY COME INTO PLAY UNTIL
NEXTORT.
I THINK WHAT'S HARDER TO PULLOUE
ECONOMY IS THE FACT THAT THE
GOVERNMENT ISN'T MAKING AS MANY
PURCHASES.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE DEFENSE
INDUSTRY.
SO THAT MEANS WHEN WE SEE NO
GROWTH IN EMPLOYMENT AND
MANUFACTURING PART OF THAT IS
LINKED TO THE FACT THAT WITH THE
SEQUESTER THE GOVERNMENT IS NOT
BUYING AS MANY OF THOSE
PRODUCTS.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK YOU IN OUR
LAST MINUTE TO PUT YOUR COLLEGE
DEAN HAT ON WHICH YOU PROBABLY
NEVER TAKE OFF ANYWAY, RIGHT?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> Brown: BUT STUDENTS ARE ABOUT
TO GRADUATE OR LOOK FOR SUMMER
JOBS.
WHAT DO YOU SEE FOR THEM?
>> SO, YOU KNOW, THE BAD NEWS
HERE IS THAT FOR THE FIFTH
CONSECUTIVE YEAR IN A ROW
THEY'RE WALKING OUT INTO A JOB
MARKET THAT IS STILL PRETTY
GRIM.
THE YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT RATE FOR
16 TO 24-YEAR-OLDS IS OVER 16%.
I MEAN, IT WAS WORSE IN 2010
WHEN IT WAS CLOSE TO 20%.
BUT WHAT I TELL OUR STUDENTS IS
THAT THEY HAVE TO LOOK AT THE
JOB MARKET AS THEIR FIFTH COURSE
THAT THEY TAKE EVERY SEMESTER.
THEY HAVE TO INCREASE THE
NETWORKING THAT THEY'RE DOING.
THEY NEED TO BE GEOGRAPHICALLY
FLEXIBLE, THEY HAVE TO TAKE
EVERY INFORMATIONAL SESSION THEY
CAN, NOT MISS AN OPPORTUNITY AND
IT'S GOING TO BE HARDER FOR THEM
TO FIND A JOB BUT THERE ARE JOBS
OUT THERE.
>> Brown: LISA LYNCH, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, JEFF.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR, THE TROUBLING
SPIKE IN SUICIDES, OLDER WORKERS
STRUGGLING TO GET A JOB.
SHIELDS AND GERSON ON THE WEEK'S
NEWS.
BUTIRST F, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Reporter: A FAST-MOVING AND
FAST-GROWING CALIFORNIA WILDFIRE
REACHED THE PACIFIC OCEAN TODAY.
AND, SO FAR, FIREFIGHTERS HAVE
IT ONLY 10% CONTAINED.
THE GUSTING WINDS AND HOT, DRY
WEATHER OF YESTERDAY GAVE WAY TO
COOLER BREEZES TODAY, BUT THE
"SPRINGS" FIRE STILL FORCED
THOUSANDS OUT OF THEIR HOMES.
>> THE FIRE WAS REALLY CLOSE TO
US, SO WE DECIDED TO WATER OUR
HOUSE DOWN.
AND THEN, IT GOT DARK OUT AND WE
COULDN'T BREATHE BECAUSE OF THE
SMOKE, SO WE JUST LEFT.
>> WE JUST LOST EVERYTHING.
THE SPA, OUR CAT, EVERYTHING IS
GONE.
>> Reporter: OVERNIGHT, THE
BLAZE GREW TO MORE THAN 15
SQUARE MILES AS UNSEASONABLE
SANTA ANA WINDS BLEW TOWARD THE
COAST AT 20 TO 30 MILES AN HOUR
WITH GUSTS UP TO 45.
>> OUR FIELD MOISTURES ARE
ALREADY UP TO THE FIELD LEVELS
THEY SHOULD BE IN JULY.
WE'RE HAVING SANTA ANA EVENTS IN
MAY, WHICH IS... AN EVENT LIKE
THIS IS... IT HASN'T HAPPENED IN
MY CAREER.
I THINK WE ME MAY LOOKING AT A
VERY SIGNIFICANT FIRE SEASON.
>> Reporter: THE BRUSH-FUELED
FIRE FIRST ERUPTED EARLY
YESTERDAY NEAR CAMARILLO,
CALIFORNIA, 50 MILES NORTHWEST
OF LOS ANGELES.
AND SMALLER FIRES RAGED EAST OF
L.A., IN RIVERSIDE COUNTY.
THE SKIES AROUND THE CITY LAST
NIGHT WERE LIT UP WITH A MOLTEN
GLOW.
>> IT'S JUST AMAZING TO SEE HOW
MANY FIRE... FIRE TRUCKS GOING
UP AND DOWN, AND THEY'RE DOING A
GOOD JOB.
WE'RE JUST HOPING THAT
EVERYTHING WILL BE OKAY.
>> Reporter: AFTER DAMAGING
HOMES, R.V.s AND CLOSING A
UNIVERSITY, THE FIRE TODAY
TRACKED SOUTH TO THE PACIFIC,
CROSSING THE PACIFIC COAST
HIGHWAY AND MOVING TOWARD A
NAVAL BASE.
>> READY FOR WATER!
>> Reporter: NEARLY A THOUSAND
FIREFIGHTERS WERE BATTLING THE
BLAZE ON THE GROUND TODAY, AND
TANKERS DUMPED WATER AND
RETARDANT FROM THE AIR.
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY HAS ORDERED CUSTOMS
OFFICIALS TO CHECK THE VALIDITY
OF ALL INTERNATIONAL STUDENT
VISAS IN THE WAKE OF THE BOSTON
MARATHON BOMBINGS.
THE ORDER CAME IN AN INTERNAL
MEMO OBTAINED BY THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS.
THE CHECKS ARE EFFECTIVE
IMMEDIATELY AND MARK THE FIRST
U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITY CHANGE
RELATED TO THE BOMBINGS.
A STUDENT FROM KAZAKHSTAN
ACCUSED OF HIDING EVIDENCE FOR
ONE OF THE BOMBING SUSPECTS WAS
ALLOWED BACK INTO THE U.S.
WITHOUT A VALID VISA IN JANUARY.
THE SURVIVING SUSPECT IN THE
BOSTON BOMBINGS TOLD OFFICIALS
THE ORIGINAL DATE FOR THE ATTACK
WAS THE 4th OF JULY.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS SPOKE
ON CONDITION OF ANONYMITY AS THE
INVESTIGATION IS ONGOING.
THEY SAID DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV SAID
HE AND HIS BROTHER FINISHED THE
PRESSURE COOKER BOMBS EARLIER
THAN EXPECTED SO SWITCHED THEIR
TARGET TO THE BOSTON MARATHON.
IN PAKISTAN TODAY, GUNMEN KILLED
THE LEAD PROSECUTOR
INVESTIGATING THE ASSASSINATION
OF THE COUNTRY'S FORMER PRIME
MINISTER, BENAZIR BHUTTO.
CHAUDHRY ZULFIKAR ALI WAS SHOT
AT LEAST 13 TIMES IN ISLAMABAD
AS HE WAS DRIVING TO COURT.
HIS CAR WAS RIDDLED WITH
BULLETS.
THE GUNMEN FLED IN A TAXI AND ON
MOTORCYCLE.
ALI WAS PROSECUTING MILITANTS
JAILED IN CONNECTION WITH
BENAZIR BHUTTO'S 2007 DEATH IN A
GUN ATTACK AND SUICIDE BOMBING.
PRESIDENT OBAMA MADE AN URGENT
APPEAL FOR IMMIGRATION REFORM
DURING A VISIT TO MEXICO CITY
TODAY.
AT LEAST SIX MILLION MEXICANS
ARE BELIEVED TO BE LIVING IN THE
U.S. ILLEGALLY.
TODAY, THE PRESIDENT TOLD A
CROWD OF COLLEGE STUDENTS HE'S
CONVINCED THAT, WORKING WITH
CONGRESS, THEY CAN OVERHAUL THE
U.S. IMMIGRATION SYSTEM THIS
YEAR.
>> THE IMMIGRATION SYSTEM WE
HAVE IN THE UNITED STATES RIGHT
NOW DOESN'T REFLECT OUR VALUES.
IT SEPARATES FAMILIES WHEN WE
SHOULD BE REUNITING THEM.
IT'S LET MILLIONS OF PEOPLE TO
LIVE IN THE SHADOWS.
IT DEPRIVES US OF THE TALENTS OF
SO MANY YOUNG PEOPLE EVEN THOUGH
WE KNOW IMMIGRANTS HAVE ALWAYS
BEEN THE ENGINE OF OUR ECONOMY,
STARTING SOME OF OUR GREATEST
COMPANIES AND PIONEERING NEW
INDUSTRIES.
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT OBAMA
ALSO CONCEDED THE ROOT OF MUCH
OF MEXICO'S VIOLENCE IS THE
DEMAND FOR ILLEGAL DRUGS IN THE
U.S.
THE PRESIDENT ALSO ACKNOWLEDGED
THAT MOST GUNS USED TO COMMIT
CRIME IN MEXICO COME FROM THE
U.S.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
>> Woodruff: THERE'S BEEN A
STUNNING INCREASE IN THE SUICIDE
RATE AMONG MIDDLE-AGED
AMERICANS.
THE FINDING IS PART OF A NEW
STUDY BY THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE
CONTROL AND PREVENTION THAT
SPELLS OUT HOW MUCH SUICIDE IS A
GROWING PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERN IN
THE U.S.
RAY SUAREZ HAS MORE.
>> Suarez: THE ANALYSIS LOOKED
AT DATA COMPILED OVER A LITTLE
MORE THAN A DECADE, A PERIOD
ENDING IN 2010 THAT INCLUDED THE
FINANCIAL PRICES AND THE GREAT
RECESSION.
IN 2010 THERE WERE MORE SUICIDES
IN THE U.S.-- 38,000 PLUS-- THAN
THERE WERE FATAL MOTOR VEHICLE
ACCIDENTS.
MOST DISTURBING, THAT SPIKE
AMONG THE MIDDLE AGED.
A 28% RISE OVERALL.
THE 40% JUMP AMONG WHITE
AMERICANS AND AMONG MEN IN THEIR
50s SUICIDES INCREASED BY MORE
THAN 48%.
GUNS REMAINED THE LEADING METHOD
USED IN ALL SUICIDES FOLLOWED BY
POISONING, OVERDOSES AND
SUFFOCATION.
SOME PERSPECTIVE ON ALL THIS
FROM DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN, THE
DIRECTOR OF THE C.D.C.
DR. FRIEDEN, THE MORBIDITY AND
MORTALITY REPORT IS A TECHNICAL
DOCUMENT.
CAN YOU TEASE IT WHAT STRESSORS
MIGHT EXPLAIN THIS TREMENDOUS
SPIKE IN THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
TAKING THEIR OWN LIVES?
>> WE DON'T KNOW WHAT
SPECIFICALLY IS CAUSING IT BUT
THE TREND HAS BEEN CONSISTENT
AND IF ANYTHING ARE NUMBERS
WOULD UNDERESTIMATE THE GRAVITY
OF THE PROBLEM.
AND, OF COURSE, EVEN ONE DEATH
FROM SUICIDE IS A TERRIBLE
TRAGEDY AND MANY OF THEM ARE
PREVENTABLE.
WE KNOW THAT IN TIMES OF
FINANCIAL STRESS THERE'S
GENERALLY AN INCREASE IN
SUICIDES.
WE ALSO KNOW THAT THIS IS A
GENERATION THAT GREW UP AT A
TIME WHEN THEY EXPECTED MORE
THAN SOME HAVE BEEN ABLE TO
ACHIEVE IN THEIR LIVES.
AND ALSO THAT THEY'RE STRESSED
WITH WHAT THEIR KIDS ARE GOING
THROUGH AND WHAT THEIR PARENTS
ARE GOING THROUGH.
SO IN SOME WAY IT IS SANDWICH
GENERATION.
AND FURTHER MORE THEY HAVE
ACCESS TO THINGS LIKE
PRESCRIPTION OPIATES THAT CAN BE
SO DEADLY AND THAT ARE A BIG
PART OF AN INCREASE LIKE THIS.
>> Suarez: DOES SO DOES THIS
TREND HAPPEN TO COINCIDE WITH
HIGHER USE AND ABUSE OF
PRESCRIPTION MEDICATION?
>> WE'VE SEEN AN INCREASE OF
ALMOST 500% IN DEATHS FROM
PRESCRIPTION OPIATES.
SOME OF THOSE ARE UNINTENTIONAL
OVERDOSES AND SOME OF THOSE ARE
SUICIDES.
AS MORE PRESCRIPTION OPIATES
HAVE BEEN PRESCRIBED, MORE OF
THEM HAVE BEEN ABUSED AND MORE
PEOPLE HAVE DIED EITHER
INTENTIONALLY OR UNINTENTIONALLY
FROM PRESCRIPTION OPIATES.
>> Suarez: AND WHAT ABOUT ABUSE
OF NON-PRESCRIPTION DRUGS?
ILLEGAL OR ILLICIT DRUGS.
HAVE WE SEEN -- DO WE KNOW
WHETHER THOSE DEATHS ARE
INTENTIONAL FROM THINGS LIKE
COCAINE, HEROIN, METHAMPHETAMINE
>> ONE THING THAT'S QUITE
STRIKING IS THAT TODAY THERE ARE
MORE PEOPLE WHO DIE FROM
PRESCRIPTION OPIATES THAN FROM
HEROIN AND COCAINE COMBINED.
SO A MAJOR PROBLEM.
AND ONE THING THAT ALSO ISN'T
ALWAYS RECOGNIZED IS THAT
ALCOHOL IS A SIGNIFICANT
CONTRIBUTOR TO DEPRESSION AND TO
MENTAL HEALTH PROBLEMS.
THAT BINGE DRINKING AND PROBLEM
DRINK CANNING REALLY EXACERBATE
MENTAL HEALTH PROBLEMS SO FOR
PEOPLE TO CUT DOWN, NEVER MORE
THAN FOUR FOR MEN, NEVER MORE
THAN THREE FOR WOMEN AT ONE
SITTING, MAKES A BIG DIFFERENCE.
THERE'S A LOT THAT PEOPLE CAN DO
TO TAKE CARE OF THEMSELVES AND
THEIR FAMILIES AND FRIENDS TO
REDUCE THE RISK OF SUICIDE BUT
WE KNOW THAT THIS IS A
CHALLENGING PROBLEM AND FOR THE
FAMILIES DEALING WITH SUICIDE OF
A FAMILY MEMBER IT'S
DEVASTATING.
>> Suarez: A BIG PART OF THE
C.D.C. BRIEF, DOCTOR, IS
PREVENTION.
AND I'M WONDERING HOW YOU CRAFT
A RESPONSE TO THESE NUMBERS WHEN
YOU SEE IN CERTAIN GROUPS THAT
THE PROBLEM IS ACUTE: AMONG MORE
ELDERLY WOMEN, AMONG WHITE MEN
OF A CERTAIN AGE.
YOU SEE A NUMBER THAT POPS OUT
LIKE THAT.
WHAT DO YOU DO IN RETURN?
>> WE THINK ABOUT WHAT WORKS,
WHAT REALLY MAKES A DIFFERENCE.
NOW WE PUT THINGS INTO TWO BROAD
CATEGORIES.
THE FIRST IS SOCIAL
CONNECTEDNESS, BEING INVOLVED,
WHETHER IT'S BOOK CLUBS OR
WALKING CLUBS OR WITH FAMILY OR
FRIENDS OR TEENS OR SPORTS.
BEING INVOLVED WITH OTHERS.
IT MAKES A BIG DIFFERENCE.
AND THE SECOND ARE CARING FOR
YOUR MENTAL HEALTH AND I WOULD
HIGHLIGHT THREE PARTICULAR
AREAS: TREATMENT, PHYSICAL
ACTIVITY, AND AVOIDING EXCESS
ALCOHOL AND DRUGS.
FOR EACH OF THOSE THING THERE
IS'S SOMETHING EVERYONE CAN DO
TO HELP OTHERS IN TERMS OF THEIR
MENTAL STATUS.
>> Suarez: CAN PEOPLE IN THE
HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS BE
WARNED BY THESE NUMBERS TO BE ON
THE LOOKOUT FOR PEOPLE WHO MAY
BE ENTERING A STAGE WHERE THEY
MIGHT HAVE SUICIDAL THOUGHTS?
WHERE THEY MAY HAVE THE MEANSTOR
ACCESS TO THE KIND OF THINGS
THEY MIGHT USE TO END THEIR
LIVES?
>> IT'S VERY IMPORTANT THAT
DOCTORS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE
WORKERS ARE AWARE AND ARE
ATTENDIVE TO CLUES AND HINTS.
STUDY AFTER STUDY SHOWS MANY
PEOPLE WHO COMMIT SUICIDE HAD
SEEN A HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL
IN THE PROCEEDING MONTH AND
OFTEN THERE WAS A WARNING SIGN
SO IT'S IMPORTANT FOR DOCTORS
AND OTHERS TO ASK ABOUT
DEPRESSION, TO ASK ABOUT
THOUGHTS OF SUICIDE AND TO REFER
PEOPLE OR PROVIDE TREATMENT
RIGHT AWAY BECAUSE TREATMENT
DOES MAKE A DIFFERENCE.
>> Suarez: DR. FRIEDEN, I HEAR
WHAT YOU'RE SUGGESTING, BUT AT
THE SAME TIMES THIS THE SORT OF
THING THAT SOMEONE DOES OFTEN IN
A WAY TO MASK THINGS THAT ARE
GOING ON IN THEIR LIVES.
FOR A CLINICIAN, AREN'T THESE
THINGS KIND OF HEART TO ROOT
OUT?
AREN'T THESE THINGS KIND OF HARD
TO WATCH FOR?
ESETH PRECURSORS TO AN ATTEMPT
OF SUICIDE?
>> ACTUALLY, THERE ARE IMPORTANT
THINGS THAT DOCTORS CAN DO AND
OTHER HEALTH PROFESSIONALS CAN
DO TO OPEN THE DIALOGUE.
OFTEN PATIENTS WANT TO TALK.
ASKING ABOUT DEPRESSION, ASKING
ABOUT FEELINGS OF HOPELESSNESS,
ASKING FRANKLY IF PATIENTS HAVE
HAD THOUGHTS OF HURTING
THEMSELVES.
IT'S BEEN SHOWN THAT ASKING THAT
DOESN'T INCREASE THE LIKELIHOOD
THAT PATIENTS WILL HURT
THEMSELVES BUT IT GREATLY
INCREASES THE LIKELIHOOD THAT
DOCTORS WILL BE ABLE TO HELP THE
PATIENT.
>> Suarez: AND WE CAN DO THAT IN
A WAY THAT DOESN'T SEEM
INTRUSIVE OR, LET'S SAY, IS
APPROPRIATE FOR A MEDICAL
PROFESSIONAL CAN DO?
>> IT'S VERY IMPORTANT THAT
MEDICAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS CAN
BECOME MORE COMFORTABLE WITH
MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES.
ADDRESSING MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES
JUST AS NATURALLY AS WE ADDRESS
PHYSICAL HEALTH ISSUES IS REALLY
IMPORTANT.
WE SAY SOMEONE HAS A BROKEN LEG
BUT THEY ARE DEPRESSED.
THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MENTAL
HEALTH ISSUES, MENTAL HEALTH
PROBLEMS THAT CREATE ATTITUDES
THAT OFTEN LEAD US TO MAKE IT
MORE DIFFICULT TO TALK ABOUT
THOSE CONDITIONS.
BUT MENTAL HEALTH PROBLEM ARE
HEALTH PROBLEMS AND HEALTH CARE
WORKERS NEED TO ADDRESS THEM.
>> Suarez: DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN IS
THE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU FOR PUTTING
ATTENTION TO THIS IMPORTANT
ISSUE.
>> Woodruff: THERE IS A NATIONAL
SUICIDE PREVENTION HOTLINE IF
YOU KNOW SOMEONE WHO IS IN
DISTRESS.
THAT NUMBER IS 1-800-273-TALK.
AND ONLINE, WE HAVE MORE ON THE
C.D.C.'S REPORT, INCLUDING
CHARTS THAT BREAK DOWN THE
NUMBERS.
>> Brown: AND NOW, BACK TO THE
JOBS PICTURE.
DESPITE THE GOOD NEWS IN TODAY'S
EMPLOYMENT REPORT, NEARLY TWO
MILLION AMERICANS 55 AND OLDER
ARE STILL OUT OF WORK.
ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT PAUL
SOLMAN LOOKS AT THE CONTINUING
IONA
SERIES ON OLDER WORKERS AND PART
OF HIS ONGOING REPORTING,
"MAKING SENSE OF FINANCIAL
NEWS."
>> I DON'T WANT YOU TO THINK FOR
A MINUTE THAT I'M SOMEBODY WHO
DOESN'T UNDERSTAND WHAT
UNEMPLOYMENT IS LIKE.
>> Reporter: JOE CARBONE RUNS
THE WORKPLACE, A JOB TRAINING
CENTER IN BRIDGEPORT,
CONNECTICUT.
>> I WAS UNEMPLOYED ONCE FOR
EIGHT AND A HALF MONTHS.
I USED TO DRIVE 20 MILES TO DO A
LITTLE GROCERY SHOPPING SO I
WOULDN'T MEET ANYBODY WHO WOULD
LOOK AT ME AND ASK, "DID YOU GET
A JOB YET?"
I KNOW WHAT IT CAN DO.
>> Reporter: GIVEN THE EMPATHY
THAT CARBONE AND HIS STAFF
CONVEY, IT'S NO SURPRISE THAT
THE UNEMPLOYED FLOCK HERE FOR
EMOTIONAL SUPPORT.
>> I'VE BEEN ON THE INTERNET
DAILY, ALL DAY, EIGHT HOURS A
DAY.
I CAN'T FIND ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: THESE FOLKS HAVE
ALL BEEN UNEMPLOYED LONG-TERM,
AND, AS YOU MAY HAVE NOTICED,
MOST ARE 55 AND OLDER.
THERE'S BEEN LOTS OF TALK ABOUT
THE IMPROVING JOBS PICTURE OF
LATE, AND ESPECIALLY TODAY WHEN
THE OFFICIAL UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
DROPPED TO 7.5%, THE LOWEST
SINCE 2008.
OUR OWN MORE INCLUSIVE MEASURE
OF THE UN- AND UNDER-EMPLOYED IS
DOWN TO 16%, THE LOWEST SINCE WE
STARTED TRACKING IT IN 2010.
BUT THE REALITY IS BRUTAL FOR
THE MORE THAN FOUR MILLION
AMERICANS WHO REMAIN OUT OF WORK
SIX MONTHS OR MORE.
FOR THOSE 55 AND OLDER, IT TAKES
ABOUT A YEAR ON AVERAGE TO FIND
WORK, LONGER THAN FOR ANY OTHER
AGE GROUP.
>> THEY'RE CARRYING A DOUBLE
WHAMMY, NOT JUST THE LONG-TERM
UNEMPLOYMENT, BUT THEY'RE 50 AND
OLDER.
IT MAKES THINGS THAT ARE BAD,
EVEN WORSE.
>> Reporter: SO, HOW MUCH OF A
FACTOR IS AGE IN EXPLAINING THE
STUNNING LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT
NUMBERS?
WE ASSEMBLED A GROUP TO ASK THEM
BLUNTLY, IS YOUR AGE THE REASON
THEY CANT FIND WORK?
>> BEYOND A SHADOW OF A DOUBT.
BEYOND A SHADOW OF A DOUBT.
>> Reporter: 59-YEAR-OLD
FACILITIES MANAGER FRANK RENDE
LOST HIS JOB AT FOUR YEARS AGO.
>> WE GOT HERE IN THE FIRST
PLACE BECAUSE WE WERE IN THE
HIGHEST SALARY RANGE.
WE WERE THE FIRST TO GO, WE'RE
GOING TO BE THE LAST TO COME
BACK
>> Reporter: SOFTWARE DEVELOPER
GEOFFREY WEGLARZ, 55, HAS BEEN
LOOKING FOR TWO YEARS.
>> I'VE APPLIED FOR 481 JOBS.
>> Reporter: BUT NONE OF THEM
HAVE PANNED OUT?
>> NONE OF THEM HAVE PANNED OUT,
NO.
THEY THINK THAT ANYBODY OVER A
CERTAIN AGE IS GOING TO BE USED
UP.
>> Reporter: LONG-TIME ADMIN
ASSISTANT DEBORA DUCKSWORTH, ON
THE HUNT SINCE '09, SAYS,
PARADOXICALLY, EXPERIENCE INOWS
A NEGATIVE.
>> I HAVE 30 YEARS OF
EXPERIENCE, AND YOU'LL SEE
SOMETHING THAT SAYS "WE WANT YOU
TO HAVE 'X' AMOUNT OF SKILLS,
BUT WE ONLY WANT YOU TO HAVE NO
MORE THAN TWO YEARS OF
EXPERIENCE."
>> Reporter: AND ALL THEY'RE
TRYING TO DO THERE IS SCREEN YOU
OUT?
>> EXACTLY.
AND NOW, I'M THINKING, I'M GOING
TO BE 60 IN OCTOBER, IS ANYONE
EVER GOING TO HIRE ME?
>> WE ACTUALLY DID A SURVEY A
FEW YEARS AGO WHERE WE ASKED
H.R. TYPES HOW THEY VIEWED OLDER
WORKERS.
>> Reporter: ECONOMIST ALICIA
MUNNELL SAYS THE HUMAN RESOURCE
MANAGERS WERE SKEPTICAL OF
WORKERS LIKE THOSE IN
BRIDGEPORT.
>> THEY SAID THEY WORRIED ABOUT
THEIR ABILITY TO LEARN NEW
THINGS, ABOUT THEIR PHYSICAL
STAMINA AND BASICALLY HOW LONG
ARE THEY GOING TO STAY.
AND SO, IT'S WHEN YOU LOOKED AT
THE WHOLE PICTURE OF THEIR
ASSESSMENT OF OLDER WORKERS, YOU
REALLY WOULDN'T GO OUT OF YOUR
WAY TO HIRE ONE.
>> Reporter: AND THERE'S ANOTHER
REASON AN EMPLOYER MIGHT BE
LOATH TO HIRE AN OLDER WORKER:
IF THINGS DON'T WORK OUT, WILL
THEY BE SUED?
MARY CORBIN THINKS AGE IS THE
REASON SHE WAS LET GO A YEAR AND
A HALF AGO.
>> NO ONE UNDER 50 WAS LAID OFF,
AND IT WAS A LARGE AMOUNT OF
PEOPLE.
IN THE PACKAGE THAT THEY GAVE
EVERYONE, THEY EMPHASIZED, FOR
SIGNING THE PACKAGE, YOU WILL
NOT COME BACK AND SUE US FOR AGE
DISCRIMINATION.
>> Reporter: AND YOU COULDN'T
AFFORD TO NOT TAKE THE
SEVERANCE?
>> RIGHT.
I DID FINALLY SIGN THE PACKAGE
BECAUSE I NEEDED THAT INCOME TO
TAKE CARE OF MY FAMILY.
>> Reporter: BUT, ACCORDING TO
ALICIA MUNNELL, EMPLOYERS MAY
SIMPLY THINK THEY'RE PROTECTING
THEMSELVES.
>> WE HAVE THESE AGE
DISCRIMINATION LAWS THAT MAY
HAVE A PERVERSE EFFECT IN THE
SENSE THAT YOU GET... YOU'RE
REALLY LOCKED IN ONCE YOU HIRE
AN OLDER WORKER.
YOU CANT FIRE ONE, SO WHY HIRE
ONE TO BEGIN WITH?
>> Reporter: EVENT PLANNER PATTY
FORD HAS BEEN ON THE MARKET
ABOUT A YEAR.
SHE'S 57, BUT...
>> MY RESUME ONLY HAS TEN TO 12
YEARS OF EXPERIENCE ON THERE.
>> Reporter: WHY?
>> BECAUSE THAT WAS WHAT I WAS
ADVISED TO DO, BECAUSE YOU DON'T
WANT PEOPLE TO KNOW HOW OLD YOU
ARE.
>> Reporter: GEOFFREY WEGLARZ
DOES THE SAME THING.
>> I CUT IT OFF AT A CERTAIN
POINT.
EARLIER IN MY CAREER, I WAS AN
ACTOR, SO, MY CAREER IN
BUSINESS, IN TECHNOLOGY, STARTS
15 YEARS LATER THAN THEY WOULD
ASSUME JUST OUT OF COLLEGE.
>> Reporter: ARE YOU ARE YOU
PASSING FOR SOMEONE YOUNGER?
>> I WOULD YES.
THERE WAS ONE TIME WHEN I WAS
COMING IN FOR A FACE-TO-FACE
INTERVIEW.
AND THE H.R. RECRUITER SAW ME,
ASSUMED WHO I WAS, AND HIS
FACE... I COULD JUST SEE HIS
FACE ALMOST FALL WHEN HE SAW ME
AND HOW OLD I WAS.
AFTER THAT, I PRETTY MUCH GOT
PUSHED THROUGH TWO OF THE PEOPLE
I WAS SUPPOSED TO TALK TO, THE
OTHER THREE GOT BUSY AND I
COULDN'T SEE THEM, AND MY
>> Reporter: SO, AS YOU'RE
SAYING THAT, EVERYBODY HERE IS
NODDING.
YOU'VE ALL BEEN THROUGH THAT?
>> YOU CAN JUST SENSE, YOU KNOW,
THAT YOU'RE LOSING YOUR
AUDIENCE.
>> IT'S LIKE, I'M GOING TO GIVE
HER MAYBE A HALF AN HOUR OF MY
TIME, BUT, YOU KNOW, THEY'RE
STRESSING BECAUSE THEY REALLY
DON'T WANT TO GIVE YOU THAT TIME
AT ALL.
>> Reporter: RECRUITER NICK
CORCODILOS RUNS A WEB SITE FOR
JOB SEEKERS AND ALSO WRITES THE
WEEKLY "ASK THE HEADHUNTER"
COLUMN FOR OUR "MAKING SENSE"
SITE.
LOOK, HE SAYS, AN EMPLOYER CAN
HAVE LEGITIMATE CONCERNS ABOUT
OLDER CANDIDATES.
>> THE EMPLOYER'S JUST TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT WHO CAN ACTUALLY GET
THE JOB DONE.
SO, THERE ARE SOME OLDER
WORKERS-- PROBABLY A LOT-- WHO
SIMPLY DON'T HAVE THE SKILLS OR
THE WHEREWITHAL TO DO A CERTAIN
KIND OF JOB.
THERE, IT'S UP TO THE WORKER TO
GO OUT AND BRING THEMSELVES UP
TO SPEED AND DO IT IN AN
AGGRESSIVE WAY, DO IT AS QUICKLY
AS POSSIBLE.
>> Reporter: MOREOVER, FROM THE
FIRM'S PERSPECTIVE, SAYS ALICIA
MUNNELL, YOUROBA PBLY GET MORE
BANG FOR YOUR BUCK WITH A
YOUNGER HIRE.
>> PEOPLE'S SALARIES GO UP EVERY
YEAR FOR COST OF LIVING AND SOME
PROMOTIONS AND PRODUCTIVITY
GROWTH.
AND THEY GET MORE EXPENSIVE ON
THE HEALTHCARE FRONT JUST
BECAUSE THEY HAVE MORE AILMENTS.
MOST OF THE STUDIES SHOW THAT
PEOPLE'S ABILITIES PEAK AROUND
AGE 40 AND THEN SORT OF DECLINE
GENTLY THEREAFTER.
SO, YOU HAVE THIS MISMATCH OF
SORT OF RISE IN COMPENSATION,
STEADY AT BEST PRODUCTIVITY, AND
IT MAKES OLDER PEOPLE LOOK LIKE
NOT SUCH A GOOD DEAL.
>> Reporter: THAT MAY BE WHY SO
MANY OLDER WORKERS ARE GIVEN
LOWER PAY IF AND WHEN THEY ARE
REHIRED.
BANK EXECUTIVE MIKE LEAHY WAS
UNEMPLOYED FOR TWO YEARS BEFORE
HE FINALLY FOUND WORK AS A
BRANCH MANAGER AT A SMALL BANK,
TAKING A 15% PAY CUT.
>> THAT WAS NOT UNEXPECTED.
I WAS SO GRATEFUL FOR AN
OPPORTUNITY IN A JOB THAT I'D
DONE BEFORE BECAUSE I REALLY WAS
ONE OF THOSE GUYS I... I REALLY
WASN'T SURE WHAT WAS GOING TO
HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK THAT
ONCE YOU'RE OUT OF WORK FOR SIX
MONTHS, A YEAR-- IN YOUR CASE,
TWO YEARS-- THAT YOU'RE DAMAGED
GOODS?
>> I ABSOLUTELY BELIEVE THAT THE
FACT THAT YOU ARE NOT WORKING
NOW AND YOU'RE OF A CERTAIN AGE
IS THE ISSUE.
>> Reporter: LEAHY GOT THJOBE
THROUGH THE WORKPLACE PROGRAM
PLATFORM 2 EMPLOYMENT, WHICH
MATCHES LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYED
WITH FIRMS THAT HAVE OPENINGS.
>> I WAKE UP EVERY DAY AND,
BELIEVE IT OR NOT, I AM THRILLED
TO BE GOING TO WORK.
I DON'T THINK I'M GOING TO LOSE
THAT FOR SOME TIME.
I MAY NOT LOSE THAT FOR THE REST
OF MY WORKING CAREER, BECAUSE I
KNOW NOW HOW FRAGILE THIS IS.
>> Reporter: "FRAGILE," A GOOD
WORD TO DESCRIBE ANY JOB THESE
DAYS AND THE FINANCES OF THOSE
WHO FOR A LONG TIME HAVEN'T HAD
ONE, LIKE GEOFFREY WEGLARZ.
>> I'VE GONE THROUGH MY SAVINGS,
I'VE GONE THROUGH MY 401(k).
>> Reporter: COMPLETELY?
>> COMPLETELY.
MY UNEMPLOYMENT LAST CHECK IS
NEXT WEEK.
I HAVE ABOUT $2,000 TO MY NAME,
AND, AFTER THAT, I DON'T KNOW.
>> Reporter: AND YOU DON'T KNOW
HOW YOU'RE GOING TO MAKE THAT
UP?
>> I HAVE NO FALLBACK POSITION.
I'M BEHIND ON MY MORTGAGE, I'M
ON FOOD STAMPS, AND I'M ON
FINANCIAL HARDSHIP FOR BOTH
ELECTRICITY AND FOR GAS.
>> Reporter: AND WITHOUT THAT,
YOU'D BE WITHOUT ELECTRICITY AND
GAS?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: WITHOUT FOOD
STAMPS, YOU WOULDN'T HAVE ENOUGH
TO EAT?
>> AFTER THE UNEMPLOYMENT RUNS
OUT, PROBABLY.
>> Reporter: WHEN THE WORKPLACES
JOE CARBONE HEARS STORIES LIKE
THIS, HE WONDERS WHY MORE ISN'T
BEING DONE TO HELP.
>> WE'VE GOT SPECIAL PROGRAMS
HERE FOR VETERANS, AND WE
SHOULD.
FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES,
AND WE SHOULD.
YOU KNOW, FOR DISLOCATED
WORKERS, AND WE SHOULD.
WE SEE A NEW POPULATION THAT ARE
UNEMPLOYABLE BECAUSE  THEOF
LENGTH OF THEIR UNEMPLOYMENT
OCCURRING DURING THE WORST
RECESSION SINCE THE GREAT
DEPRESSION, AND WE'RE JUST
IGNORING THEM.
IGNORING THEM!
I CAN'T TELL YOU WHAT THAT DOES
TO ME.
I LOVE THIS COUNTRY SO MUCH, BUT
I CANT IMAGINE THAT WE WOULD
EVER LEAVE ANY OF OUR CITIZENS,
ANY OF OUR BROTHERS AND SISTERS,
TO BE PART OF A PROCESS THAT'S
DECLARING THEM HOPELESS.
AND THAT'S WHAT'S GOING ON.
>> Reporter: A GRIM ASSESSMENT
FOR THE MILLIONS OF LONG-TERM
UNEMPLOYED STILL LOOKING FOR
WORK IN A GROWING ECONOMY.
>> Brown: ONLINE, GEOFFREY
WEGLARZ, THE MAN WE HEARD WHO'S
GONE THROUGH HIS SAVINGS AND
401(k), LAYS OUT THE PROS AND
CONS OF BEING A JOBLESS SINGLE
DAD.
PLUS, PAUL SOLMAN HAS HIS TAKE
ON TODAY'S EMPLOYMENT REPORT.
YOU'LL FIND THAT ON OUR "MAKING
SENSE" PAGE.
>> Woodruff: AND NOW TO THE
ANALYSIS OF SHIELDS AND GERSON;
THAT'S SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND "WASHINGTON POST"
COLUMNIST MICHAEL GERSON.
DAVID BROOKS IS OFF TONIGHT.
SO, GENTLEMEN.
WE HAD GOOD JOBS NUMBERS TODAY
BUT YOU LISTEN TO THAT REPORT
JUST NOW FROM PAUL SOMONOL AND
IT MAKES YOU ANGRY, DOESN'T IT?
>> IT DOES.
YOU LOOK AT GEOFFREY WEGLARZ WHO
HAS HAD 481 JOB APPLICATIONS AND
NO JOB.
I MEAN, THE LONG-TERM
UNEMPLOYMENT -- UNEMPLOYED IN
THIS COUNTRY, MORE THAN FOUR
MILLION OUT OF WORK FOR SIX
MONTHS.
JUDY, THERE'S BEEN A STUDY DONE
OF EMPLOYERS LOOKING AT RESUMES
AND IF YOUR RESUME COMES IN AND
IT'S THE SAME AND MICHAEL HAS
NOT BEEN WORKING FOR A MONTH AND
I HAVEN'T BEEN WORKING FOR SEVEN
MONTHS, 11 MONTH MISS AND WE
HAVE IDENTICAL RESUME IT IS
EMPLOYER WILL GO TO THE PERSON
WHO'S WORKED MOST RECENTLY.
THERE'S ALMOST A STIGMA THAT
ATTACHES.
IT BECOME ASTERBLY VICIOUS
CYCLE.
WHEN YOU'RE OUT OF WORK YOU
REMAIN OUT OF WORK AND OBVIOUSLY
THAT WAS CITED AS YOU'RE
EXPECTED -- YOUNGER WORKERS ARE
MORE FLEXIBLE IN SALARY, THEY'RE
MORE FLEXIBLE SUPPOSEDLY ON
TRAINING OR EMPLOYERS WILLING TO
INVEST THE TIME AND THE MONEY
AND TRAINING.
I MEAN, IT'S A TERRIBLE,
ERHAT'S A
TERRIBLE WASTE OF HUMAN CAPITAL.
I THOUGHT JOE WAS JUST ELEGANT
ON THE SUBJECT OF YOU CANNOT
LOSE FELLOW AMERICANS LIKE THAT
-- YOU CANNOT LEAVE FELLOW
AMERICANS LIKE THAT BEHIND.
>> Woodruff: WHAT DOES IT SAY
ABOUT OUR COUNTRY?
>> IT SAYS THAT WHENEVER WE SEE
THE STOCK MARKET AT HIGH LEVELS
--
>> Pelley:.
>> Woodruff: EXACTLY.
>> AND WE SEE THE OVERALL JOB
NUMBERS WE NEED TO LOOK A LITTLE
DEEPER.
THIS IS A CASE WHERE WE HAVE A
BIFURCATION WHERE PEOPLE WHO ARE
IN THE STOCK MARKET DID PRETTY
WELL TODAY.
BUT IF YOU LOOK AT OUR LONG-TERM
EMPLOYMENT SITUATIONS THIS A --
NOT A GOOD TIME TO BE IN THE JOB
MARKET.
A WORK FORCE PARTICIPATION IS
VERY LOW.
LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT IS VERY
HIGH.
WE HAVE WHAT'S BEEN CALLED THE
PLOW HORSE ECONOMY.
IT'S GOING FORWARD BUT VERY
SLOWLY.
IT'S NOT CREATING JOBS IN THE
WAY THAT WE NEED TO BE CREATED.
WE ARE NOW STILL IN THE LONGEST
PERIOD OF BELOW 3% GROWTH OF THE
AMERICAN ECONOMY SINCE THE GREAT
DEPRESSION.
NOT NOT A GOOD TIME TO BE IN THE
JOB MARKET EVEN IF IT'S A GOOD
TIME TO BE IN THE STOCK MARKET.
>> Woodruff: WHAT SHOULD BE
BEING DONE RIGHT NOW THAT ISN'T
BEING DONE?
OR IS THERE THIS JUST SOMETHING
WE STAND BY AND WATCH
HELPLESSLY?
>> WELL, THIS IS THE ARGUMENT
ABOUT DOING -- WHAT ABOUT THE
DEFICIT AND WHAT ABOUT SPENDING
AND THE ARGUMENT THAT I WOULD
MAKE IS THAT IT'S NOT IN ANY WAY
AFFECTING THE LONG-TERM
WELL-BEING OF THE COUNTRY
ECONOMICALLY TO SPEND MONEY TO
GET PEOPLE TRAINED, TO GET THEM
JOBS, TO EMPLOY THEM.
I MEAN, THAT IS IN THE GOOD OF
THE COUNTRY AND FOR LONG-TERM
SOLVENCY OF THE GREATER GOOD.
AND I JUST -- I THINK THERE'S
NOT, THERE REALLY ISN'T A MASTER
PLAN OR A MAJOR PLAN RIGHT NOW.
>> Woodruff: IT'S NOT EVEN BEING
TALKED ABOUT.
>> IT POINTS TO A DISCONNECT IN
OUR POLITICS WHERE WE HAVE A LOT
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE CONCERNED
ABOUT JOBS.
WE DON'T A LOT OF POLITICIANS
TALKING ABOUT JOB CREATION.
NOW REPUBLICANS BRING SOMETHING,
A LITTLE EMPHASIS TO THAT ISSUE
AND DEMOCRATS, YOU KNOW, AND
MAYBE BOTH ARE NECESSARY, JOB
TRAINING, PREPARING PEOPLE,
GIVING THEM THE SOCIAL CAPITAL
THAT'S NECESSARY TO COMPETE IN
THE ECONOMY BUT ALSO
MACROPOLICIES THAT INCREASE THE
LEVEL OF GROWTH OF OUR ECONOMY
WHICH BOTH OF THEM SEEM TO BE
NECESSARY IN THE CIRCUMSTANCE.
BUT IF YOU LOOK AT THE HEINT SUT
DISCUSSION.
>> Woodruff: THE DISCUSSION IS
AROUND CUTTING, DOING SOMETHING
ABOUT THE DEBT.
BUT IT DOES GET YOU TO THE DEBT
VERSUS --
>> NOT TO BE A COMPLETE DOWNER
AFTER PAUL'S PIECE AND THE
PRECEDING PIECE ON SUICIDE.
THERE IS SOME GOOD NEWS.
WE HAD 38 CONSECUTIVE MONTHS OF
PRIVATE SECTOR GROWTH
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IS DOWN
BEGINNING OF THE YEAR AT 7.5 AND
TO QUOTE MARK RUSSELL'S ADVICE
YOU SEE THE GLASS AS HALF FULL,
GET A SMALLER GLASS.
THERE IS GOOD NEWS.
NOW, THE BAD NEWS IS WE'VE JUST
HEARD IT, THE LONG-TERM
UNEMPLOYMENT AND IT'S SOBERING.
IT WOULD TAKE 16 MORE MONTHS OF
GROWTH THAT WE HAVE NOW TO GET
BACK TO WHAT WE WERE AND THE
NUMBER OF AMERICANS EMPLOYED IN
DECEMBER OF 2007.
THAT WOULD BE SEPTEMBER OF 2014.
THAT'S ALMOST SEVEN YEARS.
>> JUST TO GET BACK.
>> JUST TO GET BACK TO THAT
LEVEL.
AND THAT'S NOT ACCOUNT FOR THE
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE COMING TO THE
WORK FORCE SINCE THEN AND IN ALL
FAIRNESS, DECEMBER, 2007, WERE
NOT THE GOOD OLD DAYS.
I MEAN, THERE WAS A PERIOD OF
VERY SLOW ECONOMIC GROWTH AND SO
YOU KNOW, THERE'S -- IT IS
SOBERING.
>> Woodruff: WHAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT HERE IN WASHINGTON-- AT
LEAST WHAT SOME PEOPLE WERE
TALKING ABOUT-- THE PRESIDENT
HELD A NEWS CONFERENCE AND THE
MOST MEMORABLE LINE WAS HE WAS
ASKED DOES HE INDUSTRIAL THE
JUICE TO GET WHAT HE NEEDS DONE
IN CONGRESS AND HE FOUND HIMSELF
IN A POSITION WHERE HE WAS
DENYING THAT HE WAS POLITICALLY
DEAD.
>> WELL, WE TEND TO EXAGGERATE
THESE MOMENTS.
AFTER HIS REELECTION IT WAS
GOING TO BE A NEW PROGRESSIVE
ERA.
THEY WERE GOING TO DO THESE
MAJOR PROJECTS.
NOW HE'S IN A LOW POINT AFTER
THE SEQUESTER BATTLE AND AFTER
THE DEFEAT OF GUN CONTROL
LEGISLATION AND IT LOOKS BAD AND
I THINK IT WAS A BAD PRESS
CONFERENCE FOR HIM.
YOU KNOW, YOU'RE NOT IN A GOOD
POSITION WHEN YOU'RE DENYING
THAT YOU HAVEN'T EXPERIENCED
YOUR POLITICAL DEMISE.
THAT'S NOT A STRONG POSITION TO
BE IN.
I THEY DISTURBS SUPPORTERS OF
THE PRESIDENT WAS THE WAY HE'S
REACTING TO THIS RIGHT NOW.
YOU KNOW, A PRESIDENT IS JUDGED
BY HIS ACHIEVEMENTS, NOT THE
REASONS HE DIDN'T ACHIEVE, OKAY?
AND WHEN YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
THE REASONS YOU'RE NOT ACHIEVING
IT'S VERY DEFENSIVE.
AND THAT'S WHAT THE PRESIDENT
DID IN HIS PRESS CONFERENCE.
HE TALKED ABOUT HOW DIFFICULT
IS AND WHY HE'S NOT MAKING
PROGRESS AND I THINK THAT PEOPLE
LOOKED AT THAT AND THOUGHT THAT,
YOU KNOW, THAT'S NOT THE WAY
THAT YOU RESPOND OR OTHER
AMERICANEAD LERS HAVE RESPONDED
IN LOW POINTS THAT COME IN EVERY
PRESIDENCY.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ELSE CAN YOU
ADD?
>> I'D ADD THIS, JUDY: THE
EXPECTATIONS WERE HIGH.
BARACK OBAMA, THE FIRST AND ONLY
AMERICAN PRESIDENT SINCE--
SINCE-- DWIGHT EISENHOWER SIX
DECADES AGO TO GET MORE THAN 51%
OF THE VOTE IN SUCCESSIVE
ELECTIONS.
THAT'S A MAJOR ACHIEVEMENT.
EXPECTATIONS WERE HIGH AND
MICHAEL IS RIGHT, THE SEQUESTER
AND THE GUN CONTROL VOTES WERE A
STINGING DEFEAT FOR THE
PRESIDENT AND DISAPPOINTMENTS
FOR HIS SUPPORTERS.
I THOUGHT THE PRESS CONFERENCE
WAS A DISASTER.
I THOUGHT IT WAS A DISASTER
BECAUSE HE BROUGHT TO IT NO
ENERGY, NO ZEST FOR BATTLE.
WE JUDGE PRESIDENTS ON RESULTS.
WE'VE JUDGED PRESIDENTS ON
WHETHER, IN FACT, THEY ENFORCE
THEIR WILL UPON THE CONGRESS.
AND -- BUT IT'S ALWAYS ABOUT
RESULTS.
WE'RE NOT INTERESTED IN HOW THEY
DO IT BUT WHAT THEY DO.
GEORGE BUSH GOT THINGS DONE IN
THE CONGRESS BY ENLISTING A
TOTALLY UNITED REPUBLICAN PARTY
AND PICKING UP A COUPLE OF
OUTLIAR DEMOCRATS TO PASS HIS
LEGISLATION.
BIK ANGERED HIS OWN PARTY BY
TRIANGULATING.
BY REACHING ACROSS THE AISLE,
ANGERING HIS OWN PARTY.
RIGHT NOW, BARACK OBAMA HAS TO
CONFRONT THAT THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY IN CONGRESS IS WHAT IT IS.
IT'S A CONGRESSIONAL PARTY.
IT'S NOT INTERESTED IN NATIONAL
ELECTIONS.
THEY HAVE LOST THE REPUBLICANS
-- FIVE OF THE LAST SIX
ELECTIONS THEY'VE LOST THE
POPULAR VOTE.
THEY ARE NOT COMPETITIVE AT THIS
POINT.
SO THEY ARE A CONGRESSIONAL
PARTY JUST AS BETWEEN 1968 AND
1992 THE DEMOCRATS WERE
CONGRESSIONAL PARTY.
THEY GOT WIPED OUT IN
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS --.
>> Woodruff: YOU'RE SAYING HE
CAN'T COUNT ON THEM TO WORK WITH
HIM.
>> HE HAS TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO
PICK OFF SOME OF THEM.
WHETHER YOU DO SOME WITH
SEDUCTION, YOU DO OTHERS WITH
COERCION.
>> Woodruff: AND YOU HAD THAT
COMMENT MICHAEL GERSON THIS WEEK
FROM PAT TOOMEY, THE SENATOR
FROM PENNSYLVANIA SAYING THE
REASON MANY IN HIS PARTY DIDN'T
GO ALONG WITH THE GUN CONTROL
COMPROMISE WAS BECAUSE THEY
DIDN'T WANT TO DO SOMETHING TO
HELP THE PRESIDENT.
>> I WOULD ADD TO THAT.
I THINK THAT'S TRUE.
I THINK YOU HAVE A CONNECTION
BETWEEN OBSTRUCTIONISM --
STRUCTURAL THINGS THAT HAVE TO
DO WITH POLARIZATION IN AMERICAN
POLITICS AND PRESIDENTIAL
LEADERSHIP ON THESE ISSUES.
I THINK ALL THOSE THINGS ARE
CONSISTENT WITH ONE ANOTHER.
BUT I DO THINK TRE AHERE REAL
RISKS FOR JUST REPUBLICANS
OPPOSING THINGS.
>> I AGREE.
>> THE REASON THAT MARK TALKED
ABOUT.
REPUBLICANS RIGHT NOW HAVE SOME
POSITIVE GOALS THEY HAVE TO DO
TO RETURN TO COMPETITIVENESS AS
A NATIONAL PARTY.
THEY HAVE TO APPEAL TO NEW
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS.
THEY HAVE TO APPEAL TO
BLUE-COLLAR ASPIRING VOTERS.
THEY HAVE TO MODIFY THEIR TONE
ON SOME SOCIAL ISSUES IN ORDER
TO COMPETE.
AND IF YOU'RE JUST OPPOSING THE
PRESIDENT YOU'RE NOT MAKING
PROGRESS ON THESE OTHER ISSUES.
THIS IS WHERE THE RUBBER HITS
THE ROAD FOR REPUBLICANS ON
IMMIGRATION.
IF THE SENATE COMES OUT WITH A
BILL AND PASSES IT WITH 60 OR 70
VOTE, WHICH IS POSSIBLE, NOT
CERTAIN BUT POSSIBLE, THE HOUSE
WILL THEN FACE THIS CHOICE.
THEY'LL BE STANDING ON A PERES
SIS.
DO WE BLOCK IMMIGRATION REFORM
IN AMERICA OR DO WE COME UP WITH
ENOUGH REPUBLICANS WITH ENOUGH
DEMOCRATS TO PASS THIS THING?
D ANIT WILL BE A DEFINING MOMENT
FOR REPUBLICANS WHETHER THEY
REALLY WANT TO PURSUE THAT
OBSTRUCTION STRATEGY.
>> Pelley: I AGREE.
BUT I'D JUST REMIND -- DEMOCRATS
BETWEEN '68AND '92, THEY LOST
49 STATES IN 1972 IN THE
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
THEY LOST 49 STATES IN 1984.
THEY LOST 44 IN 1980 BUT THEY
KEPT THEIR CONGRESSIONAL
MAJORITY.
THEY WERE IN CONTROL OF THE
HOUSE ALL THAT TIME.
>> Woodruff: WHILE THEY WERE
LOSING NATIONALLY.
IS
>> SO THEY BECAME A
CONGRESSIONAL PARTY.
THEY WEREN'T OPPOSED TO THEIR
NATIONAL TICKET BUT THE NATIONAL
TICKET DIDN'T WIN.
THEY WERE STILL THE CHAIRMAN OF
THEIR COMMITTEE AND THAT'S WHAT
THE REPUBLICANS ARE RIGHT NOW.
WHAT THEY'RE WORRIED ABOUT-- AND
MICHAEL IS RIGHT IN THE SCENARIO
ABOUT IMMIGRATION-- BUT IF I'M
SITTING THERE AS A HOUSE
REPUBLICAN AND TED CRUZ OF TEXAS
AND RAND PAUL OF KENTUCKY AND
MIKE LEE OF UTAH HAVE GENERATED
A LOT OF GRASS-ROOTS OPPOSITION
TO IMMIGRATION AND I'VE'M
WORRIED ABOUT A PRIMARY
CHALLENGE AS A HOUSE REPUBLICAN
IN MY DISTRICT ON THIS ISSUE,
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO GO ALONG.
I DON'T CARE IF IT PASSES THE
SENATE BY 65 VOTES.
>> Woodruff: WHERE DOES THIS GO
FROM HERE?
ON GUN CONTROL REPUBLICANS WERE
NOT PREPARED TO GO ALONG IN THE
LAST WEEK.
GUN CONTROL ADVOCATES HAVE BEEN
OUT THERE AT THE GRASS-ROOTS
LEVEL GIVING SENATORS -- KELLY
AYOTTE, THE REPUBLICAN IN NEW
HAMPSHIRE, GIVING HER A HARD
TIME, QUESTIONING HER VOTE.
COULD REPUBLICANS BE MOVED TO
CHANGE THEIR POSITION ON SOME OF
THESE ISSUES BECAUSE OF --
>> WELL, I THINK THAT -- I THINK
THERE'S BEEN A BACKLASH BUT A
RELATIVELY MINOR ONE ON THE GUN
ISSUE.
PARTICULARLY IN YOU'RE IN
CERTAIN PARTS OF THE COUNTRY
WHERE YOU DON'T FEEL MUCH
PRESSURE.
NEW HAMPSHIRE IS A MORE DIVIDED
STATE.
BUT I REALLY DO BELIEVE THAT THE
IMMIGRATION ISSUE FOR
REPUBLICANS JUST LOOKING AT THE
NUMBERS THAT MOST PEOPLE--
INCLUDING PEOPLE LIKE RYAN AND
RUBIO AND OTHERS-- UNDERSTAND
THAT THIS IS AN EXISTENTIAL
PROBLEM.
>> RYAN DOES.
RUBIO IS A LITTLE BIT IN BOTH
CAMPS.
>> WELL, BECAUSE I THINK HE
WANTS TO LEV RAEJ ROLE.
>> OKAY.
>> BUT I DO THINK THEY REALIZE
THAT THIS IS NOT JUST AN OPTION.
IF WE -- IF REPUBLICANS FAIL
THIS TEST, THEY MAY CEASE TO BE
A NATIONAL PARTY FOR A LONG
TIME.
AND I THINK THAT POLITICAL
REALITY COULD FILTER IN.
AND I HOPE SO.
>> ON GUN CONTROL, JUDY, THIS IS
THE FIRST TIME THAT THERE'S BEEN
AN ADVERSE REACTION TO HAVING
VOTED AGAINST THE N.R.A.
WHETHER IT'S KELLY AYOTTE,
WHETHER IT'S KAY HAGUEEN IN
NORTH CAROLINA WHO'S IN A TOUGH
RACE WHO CAST A DIFFICULT VOTE
AND HER NUMBERS HAVE GONE UP.
JEFF FLAKE IN ARIZONA, HIS
NUMBERS HAVE GONE DOWN.
THE SAME THING HAS HAPPENED IN
ALASKA WITH MURKOWSKI.
NOW, THAT'S IMPRESSIVE.
BUT WHAT WE'VE GOT TO THE DO IF
YOU'RE ON THE GUN SAFETY SIDE,
YOU'VE GOT TO GO INTO THOSE
STATES AND WORK FOR KAY HAGEN.
YOU HAVE TO SAY YOU'VE TAKEN THE
TOUGH VOTE, WE'LL BE IN THIS FOR
THE LONG RUN, NOT JUST ONE WEEK
OF TOWN MEETINGS.
>> Woodruff: I HEAR YOU BOTH.
I HOPED TO END ON A REALLY UP
NOTE BUT IT WASN'T TO BE.
NEXT TIME.
MARK SHIELDS, MICHAEL GERSON,
THANK YOU BOTH.
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT, WHAT
ARE YOU HAVING FOR DINNER?
WHERE DID IT COME FROM?
AND, MOST RELEVANT TO OUR TOPIC
TODAY: DID YOU PREPARE IT, COOK
IT, YOURSELF?
MICHAEL POLLAN HAS BEEN
EXPLORING ALL THINGS FOOD IN A
SERIES OF BOOKS.
HIS LATEST IS "COOKED: A NATURAL
HISTORY OF TRANSFORMATION."
I SAT DOWN WITH HIM RECENTLY.
WELCOME TO YOU.
>> THANK YOU, GOOD TO BE HERE.
>> Brown: YOU ARE MAKING A BIG
CLAIM IN THIS BOOK THAT COOKING
HAS NOT ONLY A HISTORY BUT TELLS
US ABOUT WHO WE ARE BUT IT EVEN
HAS A KIND OF ETHICAL SIDE TO
IT.
>> IT DOES, ACTUALLY.
WELL, TO PARAPHRASE WENDELL
BERRY, COOKING IS AN
AGRICULTURAL ACT.
YOU KNOW, WHAT YOU DECIDE TO
COOK, WHETHER YOU DECIDE TO COOK
HASEN ENORMOUS BEARING ALL THE
WAY ALONG THE FOOD CHAIN.
BACK TO THE LAND.
THE REASON WE STILL HAVIZED OUR
AGRICULTURE TO THE EXTENT WE DID
IS BECAUSE WE HAD INDUSTRIALIZED
OUR EATING.
THE FAST FOOD INDUSTRY BASICALLY
REVOLUTIONIZED FARMING ALL THE
WAY BACK TO WHAT WE GROW AND HOW
WE GROW IT.
AND THIS NEW RENAISSANCE GOING
ON OF SMALL FARMS THAT YOU SEE
AT THE FARMER'S MARKETS IS
REALLY SUPPORTED BY PEOPLE WHO
ARE COOKING.
I MEAN, YOU KNOW, WHAT'S FOR
SALE AT THE FARMER'S MARKET? IN.
>> Brown: NEW RENAISSANCE, BUT
AT THE SAME TIME THE
AVAILABILITY OF SO MUCH THAT
ALLOWS US TO GET AWAY WITHOUT
DEALING WITH THAT.
>> WELL, WE HAVE -- THERE'S NO
QUESTION THAT OUR FOOD ECONOMY
HAS CHANGED DRAMATICALLY IN THE
LAST SEVERAL DECADES SO THAT
HALF OF THE MONEY SPENT ON FOOD
IN AMERICA IS GOING TO FOOD
THAT'S COOKED OUTSIDE YOUR HOME.
BEING PREPARED BY FOOD SERVICE,
RESTAURANTS, HOME MEAL
REPLACEMENTS IN THE SUPERMARKET
FREEZER CASES AND THE RATES OF
COOK HAVING PLUMMETED IN
AMERICA.
THEY'VE FALLEN BY HALF FROM
1965.
>> Brown: BUT THE OBVIOUS
QUESTION-- AND YOU WRESTLE WITH
IT IN IF BOOK-- IS WHY BOTHER?
IF I CAN HAVE ACCESS TO SO MUCH
EVEN GOOD HEALTHY FOOD WITHOUT
HAVING TO PREPARE IT MYSELF
NEVER MIND THE JUNK FOOD THAT'S
THERE, WHY BOTHER COOKING?
>> IT'S A QUESTION FOR A LOT OF
PEOPLE AND PEOPLE ARE CONFLICTED
BY IT.
IT IS SOMETHING YOU CAN
OUTSOURCE EASILY AND FAIRLY
CHEAPLY.
BUT I WOULD QUIBBLE WITH YOU
THAT YOU CAN GET HEALTHY FOOD
OUTSOURCED.
IN GENERAL, YOU KNOW, THE MOST
IMPORTANT QUESTION ABOUT YOUR
DIET IS WHO IS COOKING IT.
IF YOU'RE LETTING A CORPORATION
COOK IT, THE ODDS ARE YOU'RE NOT
GETTING HEALTHY FOOD.
THEY JUST DON'T COOK VERY WELL.
THEY USE LOTS OF SALT, FAT AND
SUGAR, THEY BUY THE CHEAPEST
POSSIBLE RAW INGREDIENTS THEN
THEY HAVE TO DRESS IT UP WITH
ADDITIVES BECAUSE THE FOOD WAS
COOK SOD LONG AGO AND SO FAR
AWAY.
SO -- AND THEY COOK DIFFERENTLY
THAN YOU DO IN THAT THEY MAKE --
THEY SPECIALIZE IN THOSE
LABOR-INTENSIVE FOODS MADE WITH
CHEAP RAW INGREDIENTS.
THE FRENCH FRY IS A CLASSIC
EXAMPLE.
THEY CAN MAKE FRENCH FRYS SO
EFFICIENTLY THAT YOU CAN HAVE
THEM TWICE A DAY NO PROBLEM.
AND A LOT OF AMERICANS DO.
TRY MAKING FRENCH FRIES AT HOME.
IT'S A LOT OF WORK AND IT'S A
BIG MESS.
YOU WON'T DO IT MORE THAN ONCE A
MONTH, WHICH IS PROBABLY ABOUT
HOW OFTEN YOU SHOULD EAT FRENCH
FRIES.
>> ONE OF THE MOST AMAZING
PHENOMENON OF OUR TIME, I
THINK-- AND YOU DO WRITE ABOUT
IT-- YOU CALL IT THE COOKING
PARADOX, THAT WE WATCH SO MUCH
-- THAT COOKS, CHEFS, HAVE
CELEBRITIES.
THAT PROLIFERATION OF ALL THESE
PROGRAMS ABOUT COOKING, THAT WE
END UP WATCHING MORE THAN WE
COOK OURSELVES.
>> YEAH.
THE AVERAGE AMERICAN TODAY COOKS
ONLY 27 MINUTES A DAY, PUTS THAT
MUCH TIME THE INTO PREPARING
FOOD, FOUR MINUTES FOR CLEANUP.
YOUR AVERAGE FOOT NETWORK SHOW
IS 30 MINUTES OR AN HOUR.
>> Brown: WHY DO YOU THINK THIS
HAPPENS?
>> WELL, TO ME IT WAS AN
IMPORTANT CLUE ABOUT THE
IMPORTANCE OF COOKING BECAUSE
THERE ARE MANY THINGS IN OUR
LIVES WE'VE OUTSOURCED AND WE
HAVEN'T LOOKED BACK.
SEWING OUR CLOTHING, CHANGING
THE OIL IN YOUR CAR.
WE'RE HAVE BEEN HAPPY TO
OUTSOURCE THAT AND, OKAY, THAT'S
FINE.
COOKING IS DIFFERENT.
I THINK PEOPLE HAVE VERY STRONG
FEELINGS ABOUT COOKING.
WE ALL HAVE MEMORIES OF BEING IN
THE KITCHEN WHEN OUR MOM WAS
PREPARING A MEAL OR OUR
GRANDMOTHER AND WATCHING THOSE
ALCHEMYS UNFOLD AND THAT
WONDERFUL SMELL AND THE FEELING
OF LOVE AS SHE PRESENTED THE
THING SHE WORKED HARD ON.
SO I DON'T THINK WE'RE QUITE
READY TO LET IT GO.
AND I THINK THAT'S ONE OF THE
REASONS WE'RE OBSESSING ABOUT
IT.
THE MYSTERY IS WHY DON'T WE DO
AND I THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE FEEL
IT.
DAUNTED.
AND I THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE FEEL
ONE OF THE INTERESTING THINGS
DAUNTED.
ABOUT THOSE COOKING SHOWS IS
ONE OF THE INTERESTING THINGS
THEY DON'T ACTUALLY MOTIVATE YOU
ABOUT THOSE COOKING SHOWS IS
TO COOK.
THEY DON'T ACTUALLY MOTIVATE YOU
THEY MAKE IT LOOK TOO HARD!
TO COOK.
>> I THINK MY FAVORITE LINE LINE
THEY MAKE IT LOOK TOO HARD!
IN THE BOOK IS ABOUT THOSE SHOWS
>> I THINK MY FAVORITE LINE LINE
WHERE YOU SAY "I DON'T NEED TO
IN THE BOOK IS ABOUT THOSE SHOWS
POINT OUT THAT THE FOOD YOU
WHERE YOU SAY "I DON'T NEED TO
WATCH ON TELEVISION IS NOT FOOD
POINT OUT THAT THE FOOD YOU
YOU GET TO EAT."
WATCH ON TELEVISION IS NOT FOOD
THANKS FOR POINTING THAT OUT.
YOU GET TO EAT."
>> PEOPLE NEED TO BE REMINDED.
THANKS FOR POINTING THAT OUT.
>> IT LOOKS SCARY, THERE'S
>> PEOPLE NEED TO BE REMINDED.
KNIVES FLYING AND FOUNTAINS AND
>> IT LOOKS SCARY, THERE'S
FLAME AND A TIME CLOCK AND
KNIVES FLYING AND FOUNTAINS AND
THAT'S NOT WHAT COOKING IS
FLAME AND A TIME CLOCK AND
ABOUT.
THAT'S NOT WHAT COOKING IS
>> Brown: NOW THE BOOK-- AND
ABOUT.
WE'RE NOT GOING TO GO INTO ALL
>> Brown: NOW THE BOOK-- AND
THE-- YOU DIVIDE IT INTO THE
WE'RE NOT GOING TO GO INTO ALL
CLASS CLASSICAL CATEGORIES OF
THE-- YOU DIVIDE IT INTO THE
FIRE, BARBECUE, AIR, BAKING, AND
CLASS CLASSICAL CATEGORIES OF
EARTH, VARIOUS FORMS OF
FIRE, BARBECUE, AIR, BAKING, AND
FERMENTATION.
EARTH, VARIOUS FORMS OF
AND YOU MAKE YOURSELF A COOK TO
FERMENTATION.
BE TOURIST --
AND YOU MAKE YOURSELF A COOK TO
>> STUDENT, APPRENTICE.
BE TOURIST --
SO WHAT I DID WAS A FOUND A
>> STUDENT, APPRENTICE.
MASTER OF EACH -- I DIVIDED
SO WHAT I DID WAS A FOUND A
COOKING INTO THESE FOUR BIG
MASTER OF EACH -- I DIVIDED
IMPORTANT TRANSFORMATIONS.
COOKING INTO THESE FOUR BIG
THESE THE COMMON DENOMINATORS OF
IMPORTANT TRANSFORMATIONS.
ANYTHING YOU WOULD MAKE.
THESE THE COMMON DENOMINATORS OF
AND THEN I LOOKED FOR MASTERS IN
ANYTHING YOU WOULD MAKE.
EACH ONE AND APPRENTICED MYSELF
AND THEN I LOOKED FOR MASTERS IN
AND LEARNED AT THEIR FEED AND
EACH ONE AND APPRENTICED MYSELF
THE BOOK IS REALLY THE STORY OF
AND LEARNED AT THEIR FEED AND
MY EDUCATION.
THE BOOK IS REALLY THE STORY OF
YOU KNOW, I'M WILLING TO CALL IT
MY EDUCATION.
REPORTING BUT IT WAS REALLY JUST
YOU KNOW, I'M WILLING TO CALL IT
FUN AND I'VE NEVER HAD MORE FUN
REPORTING BUT IT WAS REALLY JUST
WORKING ON A BOOK.
FUN AND I'VE NEVER HAD MORE FUN
>> Brown: BUT WERE YOU COMING AT
WORKING ON A BOOK.
IT -- I'M JUST WONDERING IF YOU
>> Brown: BUT WERE YOU COMING AT
WOULD BE SURPRISED AS -- YOU'RE
IT -- I'M JUST WONDERING IF YOU
PRESENTING YOURSELF AS A
WOULD BE SURPRISED AS -- YOU'RE
NON-COOK.
PRESENTING YOURSELF AS A
>> NAIVE.
NON-COOK.
>> Brown: A NAIVE COOK.
>> NAIVE.
>> WELL, I DID COOK BEFORE.
>> Brown: A NAIVE COOK.
I DIDN'T JUST LEARN HOW THE
>> WELL, I DID COOK BEFORE.
COOK.
I DIDN'T JUST LEARN HOW THE
BUT I DIDN'T COOK WITH MUCH CARE
COOK.
OR THOUGHT OR CURE KOSTY.
BUT I DIDN'T COOK WITH MUCH CARE
AND I COOK WITH A LOT MORE
OR THOUGHT OR CURE KOSTY.
CONVICTION NOW THAN I EVER DID
AND I COOK WITH A LOT MORE
BEFORE AND A LOT MORE KNOWLEDGE.
CONVICTION NOW THAN I EVER DID
I UNDERSTAND THE SCIENCE AT
BEFORE AND A LOT MORE KNOWLEDGE.
STAKE, I UNDERSTAND THE HISTORY
I UNDERSTAND THE SCIENCE AT
BEHIND WHAT I'M DOING AND SO I
STAKE, I UNDERSTAND THE HISTORY
WOULD JUST SAY I'M A MORE
BEHIND WHAT I'M DOING AND SO I
COMFORTABLE COOK NOW AS A
WOULD JUST SAY I'M A MORE
RESULT.
COMFORTABLE COOK NOW AS A
THIS IS A LABOR OF BEING IN
RESULT.
CONFIDENCE IN THE KITCHEN.
THIS IS A LABOR OF BEING IN
>> Brown: WHAT LESSONS DID YOU
CONFIDENCE IN THE KITCHEN.
TAKE THAT YOU CAN HELP OTHERS
>> Brown: WHAT LESSONS DID YOU
THINK ABOUT THIS FROM THE
TAKE THAT YOU CAN HELP OTHERS
MASTERS?
THINK ABOUT THIS FROM THE
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, WE ARE
MASTERS?
INTERNALLY CONFLICTED WHEN WE GO
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, WE ARE
IN THE KITCHEN.
INTERNALLY CONFLICTED WHEN WE GO
THERE'S ALWAYS SOMETHING ELSE WE
IN THE KITCHEN.
COULD BE DOING.
THERE'S ALWAYS SOMETHING ELSE WE
WE COULD BE TAKING A RUN.
COULD BE DOING.
WE COULD BE WATCHING T.V.
WE COULD BE TAKING A RUN.
WE COULD BE READING AND WE HAVE
WE COULD BE WATCHING T.V.
-- WE SET UP THIS CONFLICT
WE COULD BE READING AND WE HAVE
BECAUSE IT IS OPTIONAL NOW.
-- WE SET UP THIS CONFLICT
IT'S NO LONGER OBLIGATORY TO
BECAUSE IT IS OPTIONAL NOW.
COOK.
IT'S NO LONGER OBLIGATORY TO
AND FOR ME WHAT I LEARNED IS
COOK.
SOMETHING FROM ONE OF MY
AND FOR ME WHAT I LEARNED IS
TEACHERS WHO TAUGHT ME THE ARTS
SOMETHING FROM ONE OF MY
OF COOKING IN WATER AND SHE SAID
TEACHERS WHO TAUGHT ME THE ARTS
THE KEY TO COOKING IS PATIENCE,
OF COOKING IN WATER AND SHE SAID
PRACTICE, AND PRESENCE, BEING
THE KEY TO COOKING IS PATIENCE,
THERE.
PRACTICE, AND PRESENCE, BEING
AND THAT WHEN YOU CHOP AN ONION,
THERE.
JUST CHOP AN ONION.
AND THAT WHEN YOU CHOP AN ONION,
DON'T FIGHT IT.
JUST CHOP AN ONION.
IT'S ZEN.
DON'T FIGHT IT.
>> Brown: IT IS ZEN, YES.
IT'S ZEN.
>> AS I LEARNED TO DO THAT I
>> Brown: IT IS ZEN, YES.
FOUND IT'S INCREDIBLY
>> AS I LEARNED TO DO THAT I
THERAPEUTIC TO COOK.
FOUND IT'S INCREDIBLY
WE MAKE TIME FOR THINGS THAT WE
THERAPEUTIC TO COOK.
VALUE.
WE MAKE TIME FOR THINGS THAT WE
WE GET TO THE GYM BECAUSE WE
VALUE.
KNOW HOW IMPORTANT IT IS TO OUR
WE GET TO THE GYM BECAUSE WE
SANITY AND OUR HEALTH.
KNOW HOW IMPORTANT IT IS TO OUR
MY PREMISE HERE IS THAT COOKING
SANITY AND OUR HEALTH.
IS JUST AS IMPORTANT TO YOUR
MY PREMISE HERE IS THAT COOKING
SANITY AND YOUR HEALTH AND THAT
IS JUST AS IMPORTANT TO YOUR
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING ABOUT
SANITY AND YOUR HEALTH AND THAT
YOUR DIET IS THAT ACTIVITY.
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING ABOUT
WHETHER IT'S COOKED OR NOT.
YOUR DIET IS THAT ACTIVITY.
SO LEARNING HOW TO BE IN THE
WHETHER IT'S COOKED OR NOT.
KITCHEN AND NOT FIGHT IT AND
SO LEARNING HOW TO BE IN THE
REALIZING WHAT A PLEASURE IT IS.
KITCHEN AND NOT FIGHT IT AND
I MEAN, THIS BOOK REALLY WAS MY
REALIZING WHAT A PLEASURE IT IS.
FALLING IN LOVE WITH COOKING.
I MEAN, THIS BOOK REALLY WAS MY
AS A WAY TO SPEND TIME.
FALLING IN LOVE WITH COOKING.
AND THAT WAS THE REVELATION TO
AS A WAY TO SPEND TIME.
ME.
AND THAT WAS THE REVELATION TO
JUST HOW SATISFYING.
ME.
IT'S ITS OWN GRATIFICATION.
JUST HOW SATISFYING.
>> Suarez: ALL RIGHT.
IT'S ITS OWN GRATIFICATION.
WHEN YOU CHOP AN ONION, JUST
>> Suarez: ALL RIGHT.
CHOP AN ONION.
WHEN YOU CHOP AN ONION, JUST
OKAY.
CHOP AN ONION.
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TALKING
OKAY.
ABOUT YOUR EXPERIENCES ONLINE
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TALKING
AND I HOPE PEOPLE WILL GO TO
ABOUT YOUR EXPERIENCES ONLINE
THAT LATER.
AND I HOPE PEOPLE WILL GO TO
FOR NOW, THE NEW BOOK IS
THAT LATER.
"COOKED.
FOR NOW, THE NEW BOOK IS
THE NATURAL HISTORY OF
"COOKED.
TRANSFORMATION."
THE NATURAL HISTORY OF
MICHAEL POLLAN, THANKS SO MUCH.
TRANSFORMATION."
>> THANK YOU, JEFF.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE U.S. ECONOMY SHOWED POSITIVE
SIGNS OF IMPROVEMENT IN APRIL,
WITH THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
DROPPING TO 7.5%.
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY HAS ORDERED CUSTOMS
OFFICIALS TO CHECK THE VALIDITY
OF ALL INTERNATIONAL STUDENT
VISAS IN THE WAKE OF THE BOSTON
MARATHON BOMBINGS.
AND WILDFIRES IN SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA FORCED NEW
EVACUATIONS, AND ONE FIRE GREW
TO MORE THAN 15 SQUARE MILES IN
SIZE.
>> Brown: AND ONLINE, WE ASK
"ARE YOU A WORK POTATO?," AND
OFFER SOME SUGGESTIONS FOR
IMPROVING YOUR HEALTH.
KWAME HOLMAN HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: TWO-THIRDS OF
AMERICAN OFFICE WORKERS
EXPERIENCE PAIN ON THE JOB.
THE CULPRIT IS TOO MUCH SITTING,
HUNCHING AND CLICKING.
ON OUR HEALTH PAGE, A DOCTOR
EXPLAINS WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT.
"TWENTY LITTLE POEMS TO SAVE
AMERICA" IS THE TITLE OF AN
ESSAY BY POET TONY HOAGLAND FOR
"HARPER'S MAGAZINE."
JEFF TALKS WITH HOAGLAND ABOUT
CHANGING HOW POETRY IS TAUGHT IN
SCHOOLS.
AND ON THE RUNDOWN, MICHAEL
POLLAN READS FROM HIS BOOONK
HOW HE LEARNED TO MAKE
TRADITIONAL KOREAN KIMCHI.
AND ON "NEED TO KNOW" TONIGHT ON
PBS, THE NEW ECONOMY DEMANDS NEW
SKILLS FROM AMERICAN WORKERS AND
NEW WAYS OF LEARNING THOSE
SKILLS.
WE HAVE A LINK TO THEIR STORY ON
OUR HOMEPAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON MONDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT WHETHER
OR NOT CORPORATIONS SHOULD
PUBLICLY DISCLOSE ALL THEIR
POLITICAL DONATIONS.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
"WASHINGTON WEEK" CAN BE SEEN
LATER THIS EVENING ON MOST
PBS STATIONS.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE MONDAY EVENING.
HAVE A NICE WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GOOD NIGHT.